                                                                                                                                                                                                nature research | reporting summary
                                                                                                      Corresponding author(s): Christoph Ratzke, Jeff Gore
                                                                                                      Last updated by author(s): Nov 5, 2019


Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.




Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
           The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
           A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
           The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
           Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.

           A description of all covariates tested
           A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
           A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
           AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)

           For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
           Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.

           For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
           For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
           Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
                                                 Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.


Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
  Data collection              16S amplicon sequencing raw data was processed with dada2 package in R, as described in Callahan, B. J., Sankaran, K., Fukuyama, J. A.,
                               McMurdie, P. J. & Holmes, S. P. Bioconductor
                               Workflow for Microbiome Data Analysis: from raw reads to community analyses. F1000Res 5,
                               (2016).

  Data analysis                Data analysis was done in Python3, which SciPy and NumPy packages. Plotting was done with matplotlib package.
                               Simulations were run by integrating the given equations with Odeint in SciPy, as described in the Supplementary Methods.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.


Data
Policy information about availability of data
 All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
     - Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets



                                                                                                                                                                                                October 2018
     - A list of figures that have associated raw data
     - A description of any restrictions on data availability

We will make the sequencing raw data accessible on a repository upon publication.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                             nature research | reporting summary
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
    Life sciences                        Behavioural & social sciences                  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf




Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
  Sample size              We did several test runs of both the pairwise interaction experiments as well as the experiments on complex communities. In both cases we
                           could see that the expected effects are rather large and thus 8 species ( and thus all their combinations) for the pairwise competition and 3x3
                           ( three different sample sited with three technical replicates each) samples for complex communities should be more than sufficient.

  Data exclusions          For the bacterial co-culture at high nutrient, high buffer one community showed cross contamination and was removed from further analysis.
                           Few of the 16S sequencing reactions failed and therefore excluded themselves as shown in Supplementary Fig. 9.

  Replication              All the pairwise interactions experiments were at least repeated twice, in all cases successfully. The experiments with complex communities
                           were done few times without sequencing ( just measuring OD, pH and plating on agar to get rough estimates for the biodiversity) with the
                           same outcomes as shown in the paper. We chose three different sampling sites for the complex communities with 3 technical replicates each,
                           that all showed similar outcomes as shown in the paper.

  Randomization            We used the same species/soil samples and just varied the environmental conditions under which they grew in the lab.

  Blinding                 For the pairwise interactions there was no blinding. However, the data was obtained by counting colonies of bacteria with different colony
                           morphologies. Since this is a very digital process ( colony is there or not) we do not expect that a bias is introduces by the investigator.
                           For the complex communities the experiments were blinded since sequencing and analysis were done by a different person ( CR) then the
                           experiments ( JB).




Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

Materials & experimental systems                                  Methods
n/a Involved in the study                                         n/a Involved in the study
           Antibodies                                                        ChIP-seq
           Eukaryotic cell lines                                             Flow cytometry
           Palaeontology                                                     MRI-based neuroimaging
           Animals and other organisms
           Human research participants
           Clinical data




                                                                                                                                                                             October 2018




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
